---
layout: assignment-two-column
title: "Build Your Second Feature"
abbreviation: HW2
type: homework
due_date: 2024-12-06
ordering: 2
draft: 1
points: 20
---

## I. Introduction
For your second homework assignment, you will be creating one more feature for the class app. Please take a look at the <a href="https://github.com/csci338/app/issues" target="_blank">Issue Tracker</a> and assign yourself a task.

By the end of HW2, we should have the foundation of a functioning app that allows people to browse and join groups!

## II. Background Information

### 1. Docker Setup

Pull the latest changes to your local repo.

```
git checkout main
git pull
```

Make sure that...
1. Docker is running and
2. Any old containers that use port 8000 are stopped

Then, build the images / containers:

```
docker compose up
```

This command tells Docker to read the instructions in the `compose.yaml` file and build 4 containers: 

| Container | Description |
|--|--|
| `app-ui-1` | UI container for Node / React stuff |
| `app-server-1` | Server container for Python / Fast API |
| `app-db-1` | A DB container for PostgreSQL |
| `app-db_setup-1` |  A temporary DB setup container that's just used to initialize the DB |

You should only need to run `docker compose up` once. Subsequently, you can just start and stop your containers from the CLI or via the Docker dashboard.

If your containers built successfully, visit <a href="http://localhost:8000" target="_blank">http://localhost:8000</a> and behold! The app running!

The easiest way to stop and start your container is by using the Docker Dashboard.

### 2. Fast API (Python) Development Notes

#### Server Command Line Cheatsheet

| Task | Command |
|--|--|
| Access the server's shell | `docker exec -it app-server-1 bash`<br>`poetry shell` |
| Rebuild the database | `docker exec -it app-server-1 poetry run python db/populate.py` |
| Run the tests | `docker exec -it app-server-1 bash scripts/test-server.sh` |
| Reformat your python code  | `bash scripts/fix-python.sh`<br>(from local machine within `src` directory) |
| Add a new poetry dependency  | `docker exec -it app-server-1 poetry add <name-of-package>` |

#### SQLAlchemy Cheat Sheet
See [Lab 8](/spring2025/assignments/lab08)


#### Viewing the Log Files (for Uvicorn Web App)
If you run into server errors, navigate to the Docker Dashboard, navigate to the `app-server-1` container, and click on it to see the server log file. 

#### Where to put stuff

|  | Instructions / Tips |
|--|--|
| **Models** | Create new models inside of `/src/models`. One you have built the models, you will need to run the db/populate.py script to actually build the database tables (see cheatsheet). If you want to create some fake data for your new model, feel free to modify the `populate.py` script. |
| **Views** | Create new views inside of `/src/routers`. Check out `src/routers/tasks.py` to see an example. After making a new view, make sure to register it in `/src/server.py` |
| **Tests** | All automated tests that interact with the database should be created in the `src/db/tests` directory with a `"test_"` prefix. See `test_tasks.py` as an example.  |
| **Test Fixtures** | "Fixtures" are functionality that run before and after tests to "set up" the test with relevant data and objects. All fixtures are stored in `conftest.py`. Several fixtures (designated with the "auto" flag in the decorator) are automatically run before and after each test (more detail on this below). |

#### Testing Your FastAPI Endpoints

##### Web Tester
To test your endpoints manually, navigate to <a href="http://localhost:8000/docs" target="_blank">http://localhost:8000/docs</a> and tinker with your tests.

##### Automated Tests
All automated tests that interact with the database should be created in the `src/db/tests` directory. Because there is some "magic" involved with the `pytest` testing framework, we wanted to share a few notes:
1. `conftest.py` is run before every test. In this folder, a bunch of fixtures are defined, primarily to populate a test database with fake data. These fixtures include:
    * `testing_setup_teardown()`, which is run on every test setup and teardown the test database and to create a async database session.
    * `users()` which creates a bunch of fake users.
    * `tasks()` which creates a bunch of fake tasks.

`conftest.py` also has a global object called `tester` which has a reference to:

* **current_user**: the fake, logged in user
* **client**: the test client
* **db_async_session**: an asynchronous database session

To see an example of how to use the `tester` object, take a look at `src/tests/db/test_tasks.py`

Feel free to create additional fixtures and / or helper functions in the `conftest.py` file.

##### Running the tests
To run all of the tests, execute the following command:

```
docker exec -it app-server-1 poetry run pytest
```

Or, you can test specific modules and specific functions, by including the python file at the end.
* The "-v" flag will give you more specific feedback in your test results
* the "-s" flag will output all print statments
* the "-W ignore::DeprecationWarning" statement will suppress deprecation warnings

Here's an example that tests all of the functions in one file:

```
docker exec -it app-server-1 poetry run pytest tests/db/test_tasks.py -vs -W ignore::DeprecationWarning
```

### 3. Node / React Development Notes

#### Node Command Line Cheatsheet

| Task | Command |
|--|--|
| Access the UI shell | `docker exec -it app-ui-1 bash` |
| Add a new node dependency  | `docker exec -it app-ui-1 npm install <name-of-package>` |
| Run Node tests | `scripts test-ui.sh` (from within the `src` directory) |
| Run formatter and linter | `npm run lint`<br>`npm run format` (from within the `ui` directory) |

#### Debugging while using Parcel
Recall that Parcel's job is to compile a "production version" of your react application everytime you save. Give this:

1. Turn off your autosave (so that you don't confuse parcel).
2. If changes to your react app aren't being reflected in the UI, try deleting the `build` directory and then making a small change to one of your React files to trigger a rebuild.


### 4. Database Development Notes
To access your database and issue queries to PostgreSQL, do the following from the command line:

```bash
docker exec -it app-db-1 bash
```

Then, once you're on the database server's bash shell, connect to the database as follows:

```bash
psql -U app_user -d app_db
```

Once you're on the PostgreSQL shell and connected to the app_db database, you can issue SQL commands. For instance:

```sql
select * from users;
```

When you want to exit the psql shell, type: `\q`

#### SQL Cheat Sheet
See [Lab 8](/spring2025/assignments/lab08)

#### Rebuilding the Database with Fake Data
To rebuild the database with fake data, issue the following command:

```bash
docker exec -it app-server-1 poetry run python db/populate.py
```

## III. Submitting Homework 2

You will be submitting Homework 2 by making a pull request that adheres the guidelines below:

{:.checkbox-list}
* Ensures all of the code quality checks pass
* Ensures all of the tests pass
* Ensures you're using descriptive commit messages
* Ensures that your pull request summary text is descriptive

### A note on GitHub workflows
Every time you make a pull request, a GitHub Workflow is triggered (see the `.github/workflows/pr.yml` file). This is a first round check to ensure that code formatting standards have been followed and that all of the tests pass. 

This workflow file checks the following:

1. Code quality (by invoking `src/scripts/check.sh`)
2. Tests (by invoking `src/scripts/test-ui.sh` and `scripts/test-server.sh`

Given this, please ensure that you have already formatted your code and run all of the tests before creating a pull request.

If you made changes to a python file, please run (from src directory):

```bash
bash scripts/fix-python.sh
docker exec -it app-server-1 bash scripts/test-server.sh
```

If you made changes to an HTML, CSS, or JavaScript file, please run (from the ui directory):

```bash
npm run lint
npm run format
npm run check
```

All checks must pass before your pull request is reviewed.